And we're talking with Glen Dawson at his bookstore in Los Angeles.
And how long have you been here, sir?
Well, in this location, 20 years or so, however, I'm a second generation bookseller.
My recollections go back to 1928, and my father took me to Europe.
And so you're mentioning Maggs.
A few minutes ago, we met Benjamin Dawson Maggs, and my father,
one of the original Mack's fathers.
The Mack's family came from Manchester, and the father's family came from Manchester, but they joked about being cousins, whether or not.
I don't know what it is.
Dawson was a name in the Mack's family.
So we had a grand tour in 1928, so I've been connected with the book business ever since.
you say, with the book business, was your mindset, so to speak, as a bookseller, as a businessman, or as a collector?
I wonder how you kind of emerged.
Well, as a bookseller, as an antiquarian bookseller, and that was because my father, that was what he wanted, and he made it very easy for me in giving me trips and teaching me and making this, but I have never thought of being anything
of course I did have a tour to Italy, paid for by the U.S.
Army, but other than that, either in school or in this business.
Did you see it as a profession or did you see it as a passion?
I mean, was it a passion for you?
Well, it's what I enjoy doing.
If I go on a trip, why, then I enjoy
visiting libraries and bookshops.
I don't know about passion, but certainly it's been my life and I wouldn't do anything else.
Have you ever collected yourself?
I have a small collection of books about books, bibliographies, which I can justify as being tools.
I have a very few books
I have collected books, which Dawson's Bookshop has published or distributed, and that has several hundred volumes there.
I do have a personal collection of pamphlets printed in Los Angeles before 1877.
The idea of that was that it would fit on a shelf, and the theory is that if I
add an item, I take an item out.
In bulk, it's not going to be great.
The quality is involved.
More or less the way Samuel Peeps collected.
He kept it at 3,000.
If it got any more than that, he would weed out those.
But he kept the library precisely at 2,000 volumes.
Well, it's hard to do when you get a nice item as to what's going to be disposed of.
I did not realize that you had
been in a position to see the book, and I hesitate to use the word trade, but the business, the world, for half a century, at least.
You have watched it.
Has it changed dramatically, or are we still the same?
I can see changes.
For instance, my father bought one lot, and I bought another lot from Lathrop Harper, and he had a lot of incandulized 15th century books.
And I bought 100 of them for $15 a piece.
Now they had some imperfections.
They needed binding or they had a pay job or something was wrong with them.
But nevertheless, those same books that I paid $15 a piece now would easily be worth $1,500 a piece average.
a change in my own lifetime in that moment.
What kinds of books did you say?
They were in funerals?
In funerals.
I know what they were, but I didn't know whether or not they were.
You bought some in funerals for $15 a piece?
A hundred of them.
My God.
And Lathrop Parker thought I was going to sell them to Hollywood Motion Picture Stars and so on, but actually we listed them and sold them back to his own customers in East Coast Libraries.
Who was Lathrop Parker?
I'm not familiar with you.
Well, Lathrop Parker was one of the
old booksellers that I met as a young man.
He was a publisher.
He probably had some money in real estate or other reasons, but Laper Parker was instrumental in forming some of the really great collections.
And he was based, did you say, in New York?
And he had an interest in
I'm selling early printed books on books relating to history of America.
Now you say you succeeded your father in the business.
When did your father start the business?
My father started business for himself in 1905 and passed away around 1945.
So my brother and I left the business as equal partners.
And so you have worked with your brother for—
He's currently the president of the Antiquarian Booksellers Association of Americans.
Oh, really?
We're going to see Lou Weinstein tomorrow.
The later generation, I guess.
Lou Weinstein has been an officer in the ILAD, International League of Antiquarian Booksellers.
He's been a treasurer, and that's a position that I held a few years ago.
You mentioned movie stars and movie people.
Would you say the movie industry does support the book collecting passion at all?
Well, partially.
Sometimes there's a director or a writer, or it can be one of the stars that has shown some interest, but most of them not.
I was at the Library of the Library of Lionel Barrymore, and I was a person at the auction of the effects of John Barrymore, and a few books included.
Gene Hershoff was really a collector and a scholar.
Generally speaking, the motion picture stars have not been a collector.
I have nothing.
There are a few.
We're going to see John Marroquette tonight, as a matter of fact.
He's on the television show.
He's quite a passionate collector of modern firsts.
A few producers, I guess, as well, the new Bill Self.
Do you know Bill Self?
Obviously, he has a pretty remarkable Dickens collection.
Well, generally, how would you characterize, basically, your entire life,
in the buying and selling of antiquarian books.
Do you have a fix on what kind of person it is that becomes so passionate about books?
What kind of person becomes a bibliomaniac, to use a phrase?
No, it could come from any profession or any economic status.
One of the most remarkable collectors was Michael D. Hurley, who was
worked as a postal clerk and never married, never had a car, wore the same suit year in and year out, and got all his energy and all his resources going into buying books.
Michael D. Hurley, H-U-R-L-E-Y, and this was a California man?
Yeah, California, and he left without a will and the books went to the county
administrator, but through, I guess, his sisters, we were able to get some of the books.
How would you describe the collection?
Well, it was a collection of English literature and rare books of all kinds.
Great.
I mean, the quality you would judge is— Great quality.
That's good.
And when did he die?
Well, we've got a couple of catalogs I can find for you here.
This is very interesting to me, because he does represent the kind of collector who, I would say, on the surface of just what you've told me, didn't have a tremendous amount of money to throw into this.
I don't necessarily want to just profile a millionaire collector.
You know, I'm also interested in a person of more modest means, and then who is able to pursue the passion.
We had an Arnold Hyland, who was also a bachelor,
He was an art director for Fleur Corporation, and I'm buying now a collection of Robert Shearer, but that's a lesser one.
Of the collectors that I've known, I would say that one of the greatest, he had the money and the skill, and it was Thomas Streeter.
I've got Bradley Martin's copy of the Streeter catalog.
I bought it at the Martin State.
Yes, he was a very satisfactory collector, because if I wrote him by air mail, he wrote back by air mail.
I telegraphed him, he telegraphed by return mail.
And he would either say, I'll buy the book, I want an approval, or he'll say, I think your price is too high, or I think your price is very fair, but I bought one two weeks ago, and it would ever stop.
He would buy from me promptly, and he would pay promptly, or he would tell me what he thought of the book.
Or he would give me the information about the book if he wasn't going to buy it himself.
And then he did a rather tremendously remarkable thing, which I have to write about in my book.
It may not be unique, but it's quite extraordinary.
In his will, he put the vast amount of his collection up for auction.
But he did say to places like the American Antiquarian Society and a number of other important collections, all right, I will comp you up to, say, $100,000, $150,000, and you can go buy what you want at the auction.
In other words, he wanted to really... That was something he got the idea from some other collection.
I don't know what the wholesale or what it was, but it was not a unique idea.
Ho didn't do that at all.
Ho didn't do it.
Somebody did, but any... Brinley made it.
Brinley made it.
Brinley, I think.
But it was...
However, for the heirs, it probably increased the interest in the sale and drove the prices up so that it was not as much a sacrifice to the estate as you want to think.
Well, I think the estate was thrilled.
Well, you know, he could have just given the collections to these institutions.
He was not a man without means.
I don't think the heirs would have been left destitute if he had given those collections away.
But it was an interesting, I guess the correspondence at the AAS is full of Streeter writing back and forth with Clarence Brigham.
He had quite a correspondence going with Henry R. Wagner, who was one of the great collectors.
So, now, Streeter bought generally what kinds of things from the Americana, the Californian stuff?
Well, it was Americana.
He was interested in the
He wrote a bibliography called Americana Beginnings.
He was interested in the first printing or the first book about each state of each region of the United States.
And so I was able to find some things for him from the Robert Callum collections and other places.
And the interesting thing is that in his catalog, he gives, in many cases, the source of where he bought the book.
So, you'll see Dawson's Bookshop mentioned as a source for quite a few interesting things.
He was a scholar-collector.
Would you think that's a fair answer?
Yes, I think he was a scholar.
I think each morning he took his mail and answered it that day and did research.
He was really a great collector.
Another great collector was Everett Graham.
I think his collection went to the Newbury Library.
I knew him, but he was rather frustrating for me, because if he already had it, he didn't want it.
He didn't see anything, and then I didn't know if he was on a trip, or was away, or what, because then he would be unhappy if I sold the book.
So, frequently T.W.
Streeter got first choice, never draft got second.
Did you meet Mr. Streeter, or was it
I think he was in the shop a time or two, but I visited him once and had my three children, my wife and three children, and he got one of his—the woman that took care of his children to come over that day, and he had a guest house down below with a swimming pool.
The kids had a marvelous time swimming and being at head lunch and down with this woman down there.
And my wife and I were up and had lunch up above and viewed his walk-in safe and so on.
Let's go back to Mr. Fellow Hurley that you mentioned earlier.
He does really fascinate me.
Can I just see if I can get a picture?
Sure.
That's a picture of Mr. Hurley working at the post office, right?
Tell me a little bit about him.
Well, he grew up in Iowa, I think it was.
We've got a little brief biography of him.
He, on a number of occasions, worked for us as a shipping clerk.
We would pay him something, or sometimes he would just come in and work without pay, but he liked to be here when libraries came in, so he'd have first crack at things.
That's delightful.
Oh, boy.
And he worked at the post office?
Did he have any kind of special background?
Well, he was very accurate and very conscientious, and he liked to work the night shift.
He was also a time clerk to keep track of people's time and check them in and check them out and so on.
So he had a responsible position and he was very dependable.
But he preferred to work Sundays and preferred to work nightshifts.
He got a little more money for nightshifts.
And do you think this was so he could make more money to spend on books?
Well, he had no particular...
Sunday the bookshops were closed, so we might as well work that day.
Did he prowl all the bookshops?
Well, he did.
But he not only bought here, but he bought at auction, and he bought from dealers like Lota and Mags.
At that time he had no bank accounts, so he had to make money orders out.
Sometimes he'd have the books shipped here if he were successful.
If he made a big bid on a thing at auction, he would be all pins and needles to know whether he got it or not.
Did you have some sense of how strong his collection was prior to his death?
Well, we knew it.
Of course, the latter part of his life, while he was filling his garage full of junk, and he was a great reader, and had certain
Authors he liked, Woodhouse, W. W. Jacobs, A. A. Milne, and all those people.
And he would collect in depth, and he would collect autographs and all kinds of things.
I'll show you his account.
I'd love to see it.
But he made no provision for its disposition, though.
No, he—Tom Neal, who worked for us, would kid him along about leaving the collection to here and so on.
But he left no will, and he was saying he was perfectly willing to have his books put in the dump on him along with it.
Do you say that?
Yeah.
Do you think he meant that?
Well, he just had no provision, whatever.
Well, what do you think the kick was for him?
Just the ownership of them?
He was very competitive.
There were some books that
There were a hundred numbered copies made, some Shelley thing, and he had three or four of them, and I guess his dream was to get every one of them.
This was a Shelley type of a thing?
He liked Shelley and Keats, particularly.
Did he have any Thomas J. Weiss things, I wonder?
Yeah, I think he did.
And then when he died, what happened?
I mean, how did things progress?
How recently did he die, by the way?
How recently did he die?
Well, I could check on the catalog here and look at that.
He had a Filipino girl who was an associate of his at the post office, and she tipped off the sisters, and the sisters got in touch with us, and so anyway, we got the county administrator to let us take a couple hundred items of our choice out of his house.
And then when the things were, a large part of the bulk was sold at auction by the county administrator.
Out here in California?
In California.
Did it have, was it a successful sale?
Well, the county naturally takes a lot of fees in handling it.
Oh, sure.
That's a great story.
Was it written up at all in the local press?
Well, there were some things on it.
This is a delightful little story.
Did he ever talk about his passion for books?
No, he talked about it.
I think that the collector that is the most unusual, however, is the one that I have most recently been connected with, and what I can really say at this point for publication, I don't know, but have you heard of a Stephen Blumberg?
Stephen Blumberg, yes.
He's now in Omaha, Nebraska, I think.
Well, that was—I've had the collections—I've had something to do with the formation.
or disposal or and disposal of a number of collections, Thomas Treeter, Everett Graff, Edith Gallier, Mrs. Goheny, and so on.
Thank you.
All of whom are in my book, by the way.
I interviewed DeGoglia's granddaughter, Michelle Marcia Carter, in Washington, D.C.
W.J.
Holliday is another.
At any rate, Steve Blumberg, the ABAA, was looking for somebody to go back to do some appraisal work for him.
KBA paid my airfare back to... This is after his arrest by the FBI?
After his arrest.
And so I spent eight days back there.
In Omaha or in Iowa?
In Omaha.
And so it's quite possible that I'll be the government witness.
It's just about now the indictment is coming through, but the FBI tells me that
The defense attorney has got to ask for a postponement of the trial, because they've taken four months or so to prepare all this stuff, and the attorney can't even look at it unless he has a lot of time.
I've talked to the FBI on this, too.
Terry Tucker?
Terry Tucker, and he's another guy.
I'm in touch with the U.S.
Attorney out there.
Fascinating story because this is a the first few stories that were broken on this, they're calling him a bibliomaniac, which isn't right. He's a bibliokleptomaniac. Kind of a little difference I think. But you well I've had a lot of experience with books that have been stolen, but they've all been to sell, basically to sell them that is. People who come in coming with them. I've uh books
stolen in England, offered for sale here, and I have on several occasions recognized that there's something wrong.
If somebody comes in with a dozen books, eleven of which are other junk and one is a good one, I can believe that they found this in Salvation Army or they got it from my aunt or their grandfather or something like that.
But if somebody comes in with twelve books and they're all terrific books,
They didn't get them at the Salvation Army.
They all have book plates taken off, too.
They have book plates off or marks of ownership or something.
At any rate, there have been cases where books have been stolen but then tried to be sold.
However, Mr. Blumberg has had an income from his grandfather or someplace and has not had to sell anything.
Now then, he probably did sell or exchange material if it improved his collection.
Do you think that's the case?
I think that's it.
Had he ever been in here, do you know?
Yes, the FBI showed me two receipts, one for $2 and one for $18 or something.
So the strange thing is he kept all the receipts for a number of years as to every hamburger he bought, every motel, every phone call, every book, and possibly his defense is to prove
he really bought these things, but he obviously didn't.
Well, he kept the receipts, apparently, of every book that he stole, too.
I mean, he kept the book plates.
He took the things out of books and put them in stacks.
Well, many of the things still have book plates and everything on them that he took out in wholesale lots.
I mean, he just came in, I mean, I don't know if you know the Curtis Indians, which is
I couldn't, in three loads, I couldn't carry it.
Well, I mean, that's a lot of mysteries.
I'd like to interview him and find out how he got some of these things out.
However, I was told that he had some Minnesota or something booklet which he fabricated, and he would pose as a university professor and come in and do some work, and then he would
take out a book plate, and I understand the one he took out he would eat to get rid of it, but then he would put this new phony book plate over it.
And then when he would check out, probably late at night or a student on the watch or something, and they'd say, oh yes, check these books, they're mine, and they would look and here's this University of Minnesota Education Library or something book plate in there, and it would go out that way.
The putting him with the book plates was partly a system of getting him out.
However, he did have a couple of scrapbooks of sample book plates of 140 places or so that he appears to them.
Did you see this?
What was your, without betraying anything, and I'm aware of the limitations, okay, but I would just like your reaction when you saw this thing in its mask.
Well, I'm just absolutely, audibly amazed.
I mean, one of the big surprises was a member of the Samorano Club, a group of collectors here locally.
What do we call the club?
Samorano, that's the name for the first California printer.
It's similar to the Grotier Club in New York, or the Roxborough Club in San Francisco, or the Rofant Club in Chicago, or the Jackson Club in New York.
Right.
Chicago.
I mean, a similar sort of an organization.
At any rate, I once made a survey of the Zamorano Club Library when it was at the University of Southern California and recommended that it be moved to another location.
Well, before it was moved, Steve Bloomer got to it, and he took a hundred or so titles, not extremely valuable, but some very interesting
things that people like Henry R. Wagner had given to the seminar club and so I and no one I didn't know in the numbers because I don't know if I didn't know that he had taken his books. That's one of the really interesting things about this whole case. I don't know what the current number is, 14000 15000 items whatever estimated low side 18000 the high side 28000. Totally half of them have not they don't even
The people they were stolen from weren't even aware that they'd been stolen.
Because they were mainly books that were rather specialized and kept in special collections, and they were not being used for reference very frequently.
Were there any items of extreme value?
Individual items?
Or you say it's more valuable as a collection?
I don't know about that.
I mean, there's one of the most beautiful Nuremberg Chronicles I've ever seen.
It's a $35,000 book or so.
He liked Incunabula from several different libraries, but some of those, and the books were related to the Spanish Southwest.
Cabeza de Vaca, for instance, an early edition of his first travel across the continent.
a whole lot of really rare books, and he would have had opportunity to pick a lot of junk too, and there's some junk in the library, but for some reason there is no natural history or no science or no medicine to Mount, I think.
It's mainly, actually, he would like to have followed in the footsteps of Thomas Streeter.
to collect the same type of things, things relating to regional, local, national history of American history.
So you do have a feel for his taste as a collector.
And as a collection, let's forget for the moment that it's all stolen.
As a collection, would you say he has very good taste as a collector?
Yeah, of course.
I personally do not like ex-library copies.
I don't like books with perforations or rubber stamps or rebinds or things of that sort of soda.
If you do your collecting in libraries, why, you're going to get it's all X library.
And I like a book with a few exceptions.
I prefer a book which is not been marked up by a library.
Our mutual friend, Michael Zinman, will collect basically anything if it's like, in the old days, he would actually take anything.
He would take crack copies, incomplete copies, which I think is
he was going to do something on early Bibles or something. He showed me it looks pretty interesting. It's in progress. He says it's going to go for 8500 a pop. I said that's a lot of money and he said well they'll sell, they'll sell, and then we'll do a trade edition, but it's basically the first of everything in American Bibles. The first Bible done by a woman, first Bible done by an American Indian, first Bible and this and that and that and he owns all of these. Well in that case he can
If he's going to smash him up, he can get a defective copy or an Alex Library copy.
That doesn't matter.
He's got three Eliot Bibles, too, which sort of like impresses.
I think he's quite an interesting character.
At any rate, Stephen Blumberg is sort of toward the end of my career here.
Here is a collection I've had something to do with that if you're
getting a postman and getting a criminal and getting a banker and getting a countess.
Do you work with the countess?
Yeah, we call her Mrs. D. I know she is, yeah.
Well, one of my earliest bookselling recollections is delivering a book to her on Christmas Eve, and as a delivery boy I got a silver dollar.
That was all the delivery boys got a silver dollar that day.
Also, I can remember that when I went back to the holiday sale, normally she operated through Lucille Miller, who was her secretary and librarian, but she knew I was going back to the auction, so she called me personally and said she wanted the Zenus Leonard in the collection.
She told me a story about how sometime she and her husband had
missed something by very little.
Anyway, gave me the indication that I was to buy that book, no matter what, which I did.
Did you buy it at auction for her as well?
I bought it for her at auction, yes.
And did you have what they call a blank check to buy it?
Well, really, there is no such thing as a blank check, because the bookseller has got to crack sometime that he just feels that
In all honesty, he can't go up above a certain amount.
But I did have pretty wide limits.
Did she know her books?
Oh yeah, she enjoyed them.
It was a very eclectic collection, certainly.
Yeah.
It got started through my father here and then people like Korich and Meigs and Dr. Rosenbach and all that.
I'll be spending a day at the Rosenbach, again, in a couple weeks, going through the doctor's correspondence with a number of collectors, and she's one of them.
I'm very interested in it.
You're going to be with the Rosenbach Foundation in Philadelphia?
Yes.
Very good question.
The whole Rosenbach correspondence is there.
Why don't you look around here a little bit and let me see if I can find a couple of things to show you at the documents.
Thank you, sir.
We're looking at the Doheny catalog.
Well, I was looking at the street or sale where you'll find provenance of many books, but then this is the second part of the Doheny collection.
And those are numbers there that... 141, 146, 167, 169.
I have all these catalogs.
And usually here again, they give the provenance of the book.
And there's a... Well, that's for mags, for instance, and 45.
That's the wrong one here.
Let's see where am I?
Well, you said 141, so try 141 and 146.
Well, I don't see the problem.
I said, here it is, here it is.
Purchased by Countess Doheny from Dawson, 1950.
That was my brother and I were in there.
And I don't know the exact figures I could get.
It was like $5,000 or so and sold for $100,000.
And this Huntington Library considers the most important manuscript acquisitions since the time of Huntington.
Really?
Yeah.
Who bought it?
Huntington?
No, Huntington bought it.
They had a... At the Doheny sale?
At the Doheny sale.
And so I have a certain pride in the fact that I once owned that book, or at least I had it on commission.
And the name of this book is?
It's a manuscript of about 1140.
Wow.
So it's one of the great prizes out of the Huntington Library.
Well, is this satisfaction for a bookseller if you don't even collect basically on a large scale yourself?
But you must take pride in seeing
and placing things in collections.
And now you just mentioned that you have a lot of satisfaction in knowing that one of the great acquisitions for the Huntington is something that you acquired from Mrs. Doheny.
I mean, is there satisfaction in that?
I guess it's kind of what I'm saying.
Yeah, well, here I'm going to give you this.
There's my collection on early Los Angeles printing here.
Oh, wonderful.
And in 1967, I had a lot of
bids, and I bought something I would have liked, but I had a bid from UCLA, and my obligation to my customer was greater than my personal thing, and so I did not buy it for $5,500, which I, well, actually, I could have gone for $5,500, but I bought it for $1,400.
However, I did
take delivery in New York at a prize, and I brought it home on the airplane with me, and I put it in my case.
I'll get that, sir.
Let me get that.
I put it in my case of Los Angeles imprints for one night before I delivered it to UCLA.
So I have the satisfaction of that book was in my collection for one night.
That's nice.
You got it, Chuck.
That's the Ho-Ho Volante there.
This is a recent Ho-Ho Volante that I wrote an article here that
about this uh this material. Here that's yours. This has been published twice on miniature books but I don't have a copy of the published version. And this is a very uh minor little thing but. It's all important. Excellent. Anything else you could tell me about Mrs. Dokini that I should know? Or Mr. Blumberg?
Those are certainly two of the prime candidates.
Do you know books by someone over in Arizona that wrote a book on the... There's one a Carl Cannon book on American Book Collectors.
I have it.
That's by Don Dickinson.
The Cannons came first, and then Dickinson out of Arizona.
Those two...
The things there are basic hard facts.
Yeah, I've talked to Dickinson as a matter of fact.
He's actually doing a biography of Huntington now, you know.
And I have a Huntington chapter where he comes up.
I just did some research.
And there's a little bit about the final sign.
This is your 500th catalog?
Yeah.
Would you sign that for me?
No kidding.
That would be nice.
Actually, this was, I've done a lot of catalogs.
This is .
It's your 500 catalog, and I'm Nick or Nicholas.
Today's August 6th.
Give this gal here a phone call.
Emily Driscoll.
She did not pay her dues, and so my brother is a president of the ADA, and I said, well, you can't drop her out, because she was on the original board with me on the founding of the ADA.
She was one of the original directors.
So we made her an 11th member, which she was entitled to.
She can't see very well, and she has somebody, but she still buys the cell a little bit.
But she must be in her 90s, so if you're looking, I don't know whether you or Sid Berger was looking for the oldest bookseller or not.
Well, I think she might have some great stories.
Well, she knew everybody.
One other fast question.
It has been said by a number of people that the book collecting game, shall we say, has kind of moved to the West Coast.
that the action is out here?
Oh, I think London and New York are still there.
Still there.
And I think Michael Zinion responded similarly when I put that question to him.
A lot of people see, well, there are a lot of people who are collecting out here who kind of have what's said new money.
But maybe it's a lot freer money and it's happier money and maybe they're more willing to
Invested in, and I hate how to use the word invest, too, but spend it on collectibles.
People can turn up anywhere with interest and money.
That's a good answer.
And just like I bought the books from Baker Parfer, he thought I'd sold them in Hollywood, and I sold them back to New York, you see, and we've had people from every part of the world coming here.
That's crazy.
I'm going to leave you.
If you don't mind, that's the end of the Glen, G-L-E-N, Dawson, D-A-W-S-O-N interview.